California’s statute governing data breach notification for persons and businesses is codified in California’s Civil Code. See Cal Civ Code  1798.80 et. seq. California has a similar statute governing data breach notification for agencies that is also codified in California’s Civil Code. See Cal Civ Code  1798.29. This State Q&A focuses on data breach notification requirements for persons and businesses, and will highlight salient provisions in the law regarding agencies. Although not covered in this State Q&A, it should be noted that California’s Health and Safety Code has a specific statute governing the unlawful or unauthorized access and use or disclosure of patients’ medical information. See Cal Health & Saf Code  1280.15.
Under California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses, any person or business that conducts business in California, and that owns or licenses computerized data that includes personal information is subject to the statute’s data breach notification requirements. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(a).\nThe term business is defined as a sole proprietorship, partnership, corporation, association, or other group, however organized and whether or not organized to operate at a profit, including a financial institution organized, chartered, or holding a license or authorization certificate under the law of this state, any other state, the United States, or of any other country, or the parent or the subsidiary of a financial institution. Cal Civ Code  1798.80(a). Under California’s data breach notification statute governing agencies, any agency that owns or licenses computerized data that includes personal information is subject to the statute’s data breach notification requirements. Cal Civ Code  1798.29(a). Under the statute, the term agency is defined as “every state office, officer, department, division, bureau, board, commission, or other state agency” and includes a local agency (as defined in Cal Gov Code  6252(a)). See Cal Civ Code  1798.3(b) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(k). For purposes of the statute, the term agency does not include: (1) the California Legislature, (2) any agency established under Article VI of the California Constitution, and (3) the State Compensation Insurance Fund (except for records containing personal information about employees of the State Compensation Insurance Fund). Cal Civ Code  1798.3(b).
Under California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses, personal information means either of the following:\n\tAn individual's first name or first initial and last name in combination with at least one of the following data elements, when either the name or the data elements are not encrypted:\n\tA social security number\n\tA driver’s license number or California identification card number\n\tAn account number, credit card number, or debit card number, in combination with any required security code, access code, or password that would permit access to an individual’s financial account\n\tMedical information\n\tHealth insurance information\n\tInformation or data collected through the use or operation of an automated license plate recognition system, as defined in Cal Civ Code  1798.90.5(d)\n–or–\n2	A user name or e-mail address, in combination with a password or security question and answer that would permit access to an online account.\nCal Civ Code  1798.82(h).\nCalifornia’s data breach notification statute governing agencies defines personal information in the same manner. See Cal Civ Code  1798.29(g). Additionally, both statutes provide that personal information does not include publicly available information that is lawfully made available to the general public from federal, state, or local government records. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(i)(1) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(h)(1).
California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses defines the term breach of the security of the system as “unauthorized acquisition of computerized data that compromises the security, confidentiality, or integrity of personal information maintained by the person or business.” Cal Civ Code  1798.82(g). The statute carves out from the definition the good faith acquisition of personal information by an employee or agent of the person or business for the purposes of the person or business, provided such information is not used or subject to further unauthorized disclosure. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(g).\nCalifornia’s data breach notification statute governing agencies contains the same definition for breach of the security of the system as it relates to personal information maintained by the agency. See Cal Civ Code  1798.29(f).
Any person or business subject to compliance with California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses must give notice of a breach of the security of the system to any California resident whose unencrypted personal information was, or is reasonably believed to have been, acquired by an unauthorized person. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(a).\nUnder California’s data breach notification statute governing agencies, the same standard applies to any agency subject to compliance with the statute. Cal Civ Code  1798.29(a).
California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses requires disclosure any time a person or business that conducts business in California discovers or is given notice of a breach in the security of the data, where a California resident’s unencrypted personal information was, or is reasonably believed to have been, acquired by an unauthorized person. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(a).\nCalifornia’s data breach notification statute governing agencies requires that agencies adhere to the same standard of disclosure. Cal Civ Code  1798.29(a).
California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses provides that notice shall be made by any of the following methods:\nWritten notice\nElectronic notice, if the notice provided is consistent with the provisions regarding electronic records and signatures set forth in 15 USCS  7001\nSubstitute notice, as discussed in Method, Form, and Timing of Notice, question 9\nCal Civ Code  1798.82(j).\nIn the event of a breach of the security of the system involving personal information in the form of a user name or e-mail address, in combination with a password or security question and answer that would permit access to an online account as described in Cal Civ Code  1798.82(h)(2), and no other personal information described by the statute, the person or business may provide electronic or another form of notice:\nthat directs the person whose personal information has been breached promptly to change his or her password and security question or answer, as applicable, or to take other steps appropriate to protect the online account with the person or business and all other accounts for which the person whose personal information has been breached uses the same user name or e-mail address and password or security question or answer.\nCal Civ Code  1798.82(j)(4).\nHowever, where the breach involves login credentials of an e-mail account furnished by the person or business, notice shall not be made to that e-mail address. Rather, the person or business may comply with the statute by providing another method of notice authorized by the statute or:\nby clear and conspicuous notice delivered to the [California] resident online when the resident is connected to the online account from an Internet Protocol address or online location from which the person or business knows the resident customarily accesses the account.\nCal Civ Code  1798.82(j)(5).\nCalifornia’s data breach statute governing agencies authorizes the same methods of notice. Cal Civ Code  1798.29(i). Additionally, under both statutes, if a person, business, or agency has its own notification procedures as part of an information security policy for the treatment of personal information, and is otherwise consistent with the timing requirements of the statute, it will be considered to be in compliance with the statute’s notification requirements if it provides notice to affected persons in accordance with its policies in the event of a breach of security of the system. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(k) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(j).
California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses provides that a notice of security breach must, at a minimum, include the following information:\nThe name and contact information of the reporting person or business subject to the statute\nA list of the types of personal information that were or are reasonably believed to have been the subject of a breach\nThe date of breach, estimated date of breach, or date range within which the breach occurred, if the information is possible to determine at the time the notice is provided\nThe date of the notice\nWhether notification was delayed as a result of a law enforcement investigation, if that information is possible to determine at the time the notice is provided\nA general description of the breach incident, if that information is possible to determine at the time the notice is provided\nThe toll-free numbers and addresses of the major credit reporting agencies, if the breach exposed a social security number or a driver’s license or California identification card number\nAn offer to provide appropriate identity theft prevention and mitigation services, along with all information necessary to take advantage of the offer, if the person or business providing the notification was the source of the breach, as discussed in Identity Theft Protections, question 15\nCal Civ Code  1798.82(d)(2).\nCalifornia’s data breach notification statute governing agencies requires that a notice of security breach include the same information, except that it does not require the inclusion of an offer to provide identity theft prevention and mitigation services. Cal Civ Code  1798.29(d)(2).\nAdditionally, both statutes provide that the security breach notification may, at the discretion of the person, business, or agency, include:\nInformation about what the person, business, or agency has done to protect individuals whose information has been breached\nAdvice on steps that the person whose information has been breached may take to protect himself or herself\nCal Civ Code  1798.82(d)(3) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(d)(3).\nIt should be noted that both data breach notification statutes contain detailed requirements as to the format of the notice and, as such, should be consulted when preparing a data breach notification. See Cal Civ Code  1798.82(d)(1) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(d)(1).
Under California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses, a person or business may give substitute notice if it demonstrates that: the cost of providing notice would exceed $250,000, or that the affected class of persons to be notified exceeds 500,000, or the person or business does not have sufficient contact information. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(j)(3).\nUnder the statute, substitute notice consists of all of the following:\nE-mail notice when the person or business has an e-mail address for the affected persons\nConspicuous posting, for a minimum of 30 days, of the notice on the person’s or business’s website, if it maintains one, which requires providing a link to the notice on the home page or first significant page after entering the website that is in larger type than the surrounding text, or in contrasting type, font, or color to the surrounding text of the same size, or set off from the surrounding text of the same size by symbols or other marks that call attention to the link\nNotification to major statewide media\nCal Civ Code  1798.82(j)(3).\nCalifornia’s data breach notification statute governing agencies contains the same provisions for substitute notice, but includes an additional requirement that agencies must notify the California Office of Information Security within the Department of Technology. Cal Civ Code  1798.29(i)(3).
Under both of California’s data breach notification statutes, notice to affected individuals must be made “in the most expedient time possible and without unreasonable delay, consistent with the legitimate needs of law enforcement” or “with any measures necessary to determine the scope of the breach and restore the reasonable integrity of the data system.” Cal Civ Code  1798.82(a) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(a).
Under both of California’s data breach notification statutes, notification of a data breach may be delayed if a law enforcement agency determines that the notification will impede a criminal investigation. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(c) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(c). However, notification must be made (promptly, in the case of persons and businesses subject to compliance) “after the law enforcement agency determines that [the notification] will not compromise the investigation.” Cal Civ Code  1798.82(c) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(c).
Under both of California’s data breach notification statutes, a person, business, or agency that is required to issue a security breach notification to more than 500 California residents due to a single breach of the security of the system must electronically submit a single sample copy of its security breach notification, excluding any personally identifiable information, to the state attorney general. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(f) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(e).
Neither of California’s data breach notification statutes require that notice of a security breach be given to consumer reporting agencies or other third parties.
Under both of California’s data breach notification statutes, any person, business, or agency that maintains computerized data that includes personal information that the person, business, or agency does not own, must notify the owner or licensee of any breach of the security of the data immediately following discovery, if the personal information was, or is reasonably believed to have been, acquired by an unauthorized person. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(b) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(b).
California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses requires a person or business subject to compliance to offer to provide identity theft prevention and mitigation services if the person or business was the source of the breach. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(d)(2)(G). The identity theft prevention and mitigation services must be provided at no cost to the affected person for a minimum of 12 months. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(d)(2)(G). The offer to provide identity theft prevention and mitigation services must be set forth in the notice of security breach. See Method, Form, and Timing of Notice, question 8.\nCalifornia’s data breach notification statute governing agencies does not contain any requirements for the provision of identity theft services.
Both of California’s data breach notification statutes provide a safe harbor for encrypted information, specifically requiring that notice be given only for a breach of unencrypted personal information. Cal Civ Code  1798.82(a) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(a).\nThe statutes define the term encrypted to mean “rendered unusable, unreadable, or indecipherable to an unauthorized person through a security technology or methodology generally accepted in the field of information security.” Cal Civ Code  1798.82(i)(4) and Cal Civ Code  1798.29(h)(4).
California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses provides that a person or business that is a covered entity under the Federal Portability and Accountability Act of 1996, 42 USCS  1320d et seq., will be deemed to be in compliance with the notice requirements of the statute (but no other provisions of the statute) if it has fully complied with Section 13402(f) of the federal Health Information Technology for Economic and Clinical Health Act (HITECH Act)(Public Law 111-5). Cal Civ Code  1798.82(e).
California’s data breach notification statute applicable to persons and businesses provides that any business that violates, proposes to violate, or has violated the statute may be enjoined. Cal Civ Code  1798.84(e). Additionally, the statute provides that any customer (as defined in Cal Civ Code  1798.80(c)) injured by a violation of California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses may bring a civil action to recover damages. Cal Civ Code  1798.84(b). The statutory penalties as well as civil remedies for violations of California’s data breach notification statute applicable to agencies are set forth in Cal Civ Code  1798.55 et seq. and Cal Civ Code  1798.45 et seq.
Any customer (as defined in Cal Civ Code  1798.80(c)) injured by a violation of California’s data breach notification statute governing persons and businesses may bring a civil action to recover damages. Cal Civ Code  1798.84(b). The civil remedies for violations of California’s data breach notification statute applicable to agencies are set forth in Cal Civ Code  1798.45 et seq.